<img style="float: right" height="50%" width="50%" src="img/logo.png">

### Abundant Bacterial Species in YOUR Beyond Bacteria Sample

All four Beyond Bacteria participants had very different microbiome profiles
when looking at the top ten genera detected in each participant. The microbiome
composition of each participant provided intriguing bits of food for thought.
Disclaimer: science is not at the stage to confidently assess human health
status based on the microbiome, and the American Gut is not a medical
diagnostic. The microbiome could also follow the old adage that too much of a
good thing is a bad thing, and not enough studies have been done to determine
whether certain abundance thresholds of "good" bacteria become harmful. Only
time and well-designed, peer-reviewed research will tell us how useful
microbiome composition can be as a proxy for predicting human health status.

You can find the specific top taxa in your sample
[here](http://nbviewer.ipython.org/github/biocore/American-Gut/blob/master/ipynb/beyond_bacteria.ipynb#000009544_taxa).

A large proportion (44%) of your gut microbiome (000009544) was composed
of two *Roseburia* species, *R. intestinalis* and *R. inulinivorans*. As
described in the top taxon [document](beyond_bacteria_top_taxa.md), both of
these bacterial species ferment plant polysaccharides to produce butyrate, an
anti-inflammatory molecule associated with GI tract health.  Additionally, *R.
inulinovorans* produces propionate, which which decreases lipogenesis.  A third
butyrate producer, *F. prausnitzii*, was also detected in your gut (8.14%
abundance). Therefore, you appear to be harboring a microbiome with a large
potential to promote your health by reducing inflammation and fat formation.
You eat more than 30 types of plants as part of your regular diet, which could
contribute to the large abundance of plant polysaccharide fermenters present in
your gut. You also exercise daily and occasionally take supplements with
Vitamin D, indicating that in general, you are health conscious; nevertheless,
you have a BMI that classifies you in the overweight category (however, BMI
measurements must be carefully interpreted, as in many cases, muscular people
fit into the overweight category simply because muscle weighs more than fat).
Interestingly, you did take antibiotics within the year prior to collection of
your sample. Antibiotics have been shown to reduce microbiome diversity and
have even been associated with recurrent GI tract infections in some people;
nevertheless, you appear to be generally healthy physiologically and
microbiologically.

### Notable Metabolic Pathways in YOUR Beyond Bacteria Sample

The most abundant pathways were similar across the four individuals, despite
taxonomic differences. This is not unprecedented; the Human Microbiome Project
also large variations in taxonomy, while pathway abundance remained relatively
stable ([ref](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22699609)). Unsurprisingly, we
find common housekeeping genes, like DNA biosynthesis and carbon metabolism,
across all four samples. We also find less common pathways. Again, we must
issue a disclaimer: metagenomics is still in its infancy. Few samples have been
analyzed in this way. Therefore, making health inferences based on metagenomic
findings would be very premature at this time.

You can find the specific top pathways in your sample
[here](http://nbviewer.ipython.org/github/biocore/American-Gut/blob/master/ipynb/beyond_bacteria.ipynb#000009544_pathway).

Your metagenome (000009455) showed a decreased capacity for the biosynthesis of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). LPS, also known as endotoxin, is a main component in
bacterial cell walls. Endotoxin leads to a pro-inflammatory immune response
([ref](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10963608)). Lower gene counts for
endotoxin may mean less inflammation. However, your microbiome also had a lower
capacity for glycosaminoglycan breakdown. Glycosaminoglycan are large, branched
sugars found on the surface of host cells. In their native form,
glycosaminoglycans can promote infection. Bacterial breakdown of
glycosaminoglycans can promote an immune response, leading to faster clearance
([ref](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25122767)).
