<img style="float: right" height="50%" width="50%" src="img/logo.png">

### Abundant Bacterial Species in YOUR Beyond Bacteria Sample

All four Beyond Bacteria participants had very different microbiome profiles
when looking at the top ten genera detected in each participant. The microbiome
composition of each participant provided intriguing bits of food for thought.
Disclaimer: science is not at the stage to confidently assess human health
status based on the microbiome, and the American Gut is not a medical
diagnostic. The microbiome could also follow the old adage that too much of a
good thing is a bad thing, and not enough studies have been done to determine
whether certain abundance thresholds of "good" bacteria become harmful. Only
time and well-designed, peer-reviewed research will tell us how useful
microbiome composition can be as a proxy for predicting human health status.

You can find the specific top taxa in your sample
[here](http://nbviewer.ipython.org/github/biocore/American-Gut/blob/master/ipynb/beyond_bacteria.ipynb#000004607_taxa).

An archaeon, *Methanobrevibacter smithii*, was the most abundant taxon (20.40%
abundance) in your sample (000004607), followed by *Akkermansia muciniphila* (16.6%
abundance). Both of these taxa have been negatively associated with obesity, as
described in the top taxon document, indicating that your microbiome may be enriched for microbial
taxa that are efficient at effectively utilizing food energy. *A. muciniphila*
has also been described to exert anti-inflammatory effects, as has
butyrate-producing *F. prausnitzii*, which was also present in your sample
(6.19%). In general, the composition of your microbiome is suggestive of a
healthy microbiome that is not only efficient at utilizing nutrients from food
but is also actively involved in promoting intestinal health. Indeed, based on
the data you provided, you appear to be relatively healthy, at a normal weight,
with only occasional alcohol consumption and no smoking or antibiotic use;
however, other lifestyle habits are not traditionally associated with the
"golden standard" for health: you eat few vegetables but a lot of meat and
seldom exercise. Therefore, you represent a good example of the difficulty in
predicting health status and lifestyle habits solely via the microbiome, and
you underscore the fact that the relationship between the microbiome and
lifestyle is quite complex.

### Notable Metabolic Pathways in YOUR Beyond Bacteria Sample

The most abundant pathways were similar across the four individuals, despite
taxonomic differences. This is not unprecedented; the Human Microbiome Project
also large variations in taxonomy, while pathway abundance remained relatively
stable ([ref](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22699609)). Unsurprisingly, we
find common housekeeping genes, like DNA biosynthesis and carbon metabolism,
across all four samples. We also find less common pathways. Again, we must
issue a disclaimer: metagenomics is still in its infancy. Few samples have been
analyzed in this way. Therefore, making health inferences based on metagenomic
findings would be very premature at this time.

You can find the specific top pathways in your sample
[here](http://nbviewer.ipython.org/github/biocore/American-Gut/blob/master/ipynb/beyond_bacteria.ipynb#000004607_pathway).

We found several unique pathways within your metagenome (000004607). One
of the most notable differences was the presence of genes associated with the
degradation of the aromatic compounds toluene, xylene, catechols, and benzoate.
Toluene and xylene are industrial solvents with potentially neurotoxic effects.
Catechols are found in many plants, and are responsible for browning. Catechols
may also be found in perfumes. Benzoate is naturally occurring in many foods,
as well as being used as a preservative. Benzoate can react with vitamin C to
form the carcinogen, benzene. Most aromatic compounds are broken down by
cytochrome P450 enzymes in the liver. Bacterial degradation of aromatics has
been used in bioremediation of oil spills
([ref](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16269736)); such potential within the
human gut is poorly characterized. Your sample was also unique in that your
metagenome encodes for the biosynthesis of vitamin C and the neurotransmitter
GABA, pathways which were not found in the other three individuals. You also
had more pathways for methanogenesis than the other samples. This is likely due
to your high levels of *M. smithii*. Methanogenesis is associated with
constipation in some individuals
([ref](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22573345)).
